---
title: Ideals
tags:
  - AbstractAlgebra
draft: "False"
---
# Ideals
Ideals are the ring equivalent of [[Normal Subgroup]]s. From this we can form [[Quotient Rings]]. 

---
# Definition Ideal
A subring $A$ of a ring $R$ is called an ideal of $R$ if for $r \in R$ and $a\in A$ then $ra,ar \in A$. Any [[Subring]] of $R$ is trivially a [[Normal Subgroup]] since it is Abelian, but the multiplicative part is not guaranteed. 

Ideals also have an absorbing property, namely the property that $ar \in A,ra\in A$, that multiplication by an element of $A$ results in the product residing in $R$. 

There are left and right ideals where the following is guaranteed individually, $ra \in R, \forall a \in A,r \in R$ and $ar \in R, \forall a \in A, r\in R$. 

An ideal $A$ of $R$ is a proper ideal of $R$ if $A \subset R$. 

---
# Theorem.) The Ideal Test
We can say that $A \subset R,A\neq \emptyset$, is an ideal of $R$ if:

1. $a-b \in A\quad a,b\in A$
2. $ar \in R,ra\in R\quad \forall a \in A, r\in R$

$Proof.)$ 
We have that $1$ shows $A$ is an [[Abelian Group]] under addition via the 1 step subgroup test, and $2$ entails that $A$ is closed under multiplication. The associative and distributive properties of multiplication follow from $R$. 

From this we can conclude that $A$ is a subring of $R$. $2.)$ ensures the absorbing properties, thus the result follows.

---
# Examples of Ideals 

### Example 1.)
For any [[Ring]] $R$, $\{0\},R$ are both ideals of $R$. $\{ 0\}$ is the trivial ideal of $R$. 

### Example 2.)
For any $n \in \mathbb{N}$, we have that $n \mathbb{Z} =\{0, \pm n,\pm2n,\cdots \}$ is an ideal of $\mathbb{Z}$. 

### Example 3.)
Let $R$ be a commutative ring with identity and let $a \in R$. The set $\langle a \rangle=\{ ra : r \in R\}$ is an ideal of $R$ called the [[Principle Ideal]] of $R$ generated by $a$. 

Some important questions for principal ideals of $R$ are, why it is necessary to have a multiplicative identity here, well we want to ensure that for $r=e$ that $ra=ar$. We also want to know why we insist $R$ is commutative, I think because we want the above criteria to be true. 

### Example 4.) $\mathbb{R}[x]$, and let $A$ be the polynomial ring with a constant term of $0$. 
Then, $A$ is an ideal and also $A=\langle x \rangle$.

By the theorem, clearly $0(x) \in A, A\neq \emptyset$, and we have that for any $p_{1}(x),p_{2}(x) \in A$, then $p_{1}(x)-p_{2}(x) \in A$ since both have a constant term of $0$. 

Consider some arbitrary $a(x) \in A$ of degree $n$ and some arbitrary $p(x) \in \mathbb{R}[x]$ of degree $m$, then:

$$p(x)a(x)=\sum_{i=0}^n p_{i}x^i \sum_{j=1}^m a_{j}x^j = \sum_{i=0}^n p_{i} \sum_{j=1}^m a_{j}x^{i+j} \in A$$
We can say that this polynomial is in $A$ since the constant term in $p(x)$ is made not constant. 

### Example 5.)
Let $R$ be the commutative ring with unity, and let $a_{1},a_{2},\cdots,a_{n} \in R$, then, $I=\langle a_{1},a_{2},\cdots,a_{n} \rangle$ is an ideal of $R$ called the __ideal generated by $\{a_{1},a_{2},\cdots,a_{n} \}$__ where:

$$I=\left\{  \sum_{i=1}^n r_{i}a_{i} : r_{i} \in R  \right\}$$
If each $r_{i}=0$ then $e \in I$. Secondly, $I$ is clearly an Abelian Group. Closure can be verified in the following, let $a,b \in I$:

$$\left(   \sum_{i=1}^n r_{i}a_{i} \right) - \left(   \sum_{i=1}^n k_{i}a_{i} \right) = \left(   \sum_{i=1}^n (r_{i}-k_{i})a_{i} \right)  \in I$$
Absorption trivially follows from $r \in R$ and $r \cdot r_{i} \in R$ being guaranteed, thus the resulting sum still satisfies the general form. 

### Example 6.) 
Consider $\mathbb{Z}[x]$ be the polynomials with integer coefficients. Let $I$ be the subset of polynomials in $\mathbb{Z}[x]$ with constant even terms. Then, $I$ is an ideal of $\mathbb{Z}[x]$, and $I=\langle x,2 \rangle$. 

Clearly $0(x) \in I\implies I\neq \emptyset$. $I$ is clearly Abelian since the addition of polynomials is always commutative, and secondly is closed since adding and multiplying things by even numbers is closed too. All that's left to show is that $I=\langle x ,2\rangle$. 

### Example 7.) 
Let $R=C([-1,1])$ be the set of continuous functions on $[-1,1]$ and let $S$ be the set of all differentiable functions on $[-1,1]$. Then, $S$ is a subring of $R$, but not an ideal. 

Consider $1 \in S$, and $|x| \in R$