---
title: Gradient Field
tags: 
draft: "false"
---
# Gradient Field Definition
A gradient field is a [[Vector Field]] generated by taking the [[Gradient]] of a [[Potential]] function, meaning that for a vector field $\vec{F}$:
$$\vec{F}=\nabla f$$
Since we can express a vector field as $\vec{F}=Mdx+Ndy$ we can simply re-write the vector field expression given that $\vec{F}=\nabla f$ as:
$$\vec{F}=f_{x}dx+f_{y}dy$$
Via Clairaut’s theorem, we know that $f_{xy}=f_{yx}$. If it is the case that $f_{xy}\neq f_{yx}$, we can conclude that $\vec{F} \neq \nabla f$. We know that if $\vec{F} = \nabla F \implies f_{xy}=f_{yx}$. We would like to show that the converse of this condition is also true. 

Suppose that we have some arbitrary $\vec{F}=\langle M,N \rangle$ that is differentiable everywhere and $M_{y}=N_{x}$, then it follows that $\vec{F}$ is a gradient field. This condition is satisfied when we have a "[[Simply Connected]]" region, basically there are no holes in the domain. 

We can think of the intuition behind this as an object in the vector field going by the hole, it might not come back with the same velocity, and we might lose the properties of a conservative field. 
#### Example 1:
Let us consider $\vec{F}=-y\hat{i}+x\hat{j}$ where $M=-y\hat{i}$ and $N=x\hat{j}$. We can see that:
$$\dfrac{\partial M}{\partial y}=-1$$
$$\dfrac{\partial N}{\partial x}=1$$
Since the mixed partials are unequal, it follows that $\vec{F}$ is not a gradient field. 
#### Example 2. 
Let us consider $\vec{F}=(4x^2+axy)\hat{i}+(3y^2+4x^2)\hat{j}$ where $M=4x^2+axy$ and $N=3y^2+4x^2$. What value of $a$ would cause this to be a gradient field?
$$\dfrac{\partial M}{\partial y}=ax$$
$$\dfrac{\partial N}{\partial x}=8x$$
It turns out $a=8$ would make this a gradient field. How do we find the potential function $f$ that generates the gradient field? There are two systematic methods that can generate the solution. 

---
# Finding the Potential Function
There are two methods for computing our potential function. The first method involves computing a line integral. 

#### Example 1. Differentiation
Consider a line integral that goes through $(x_{1},y_{1})$ and $(x_{2},y_{2})$. By our [[Fundamental Theorem of Calculus for Line Integrals]], for the gradient field $\vec{F}$ we obtain:
$$\int_{c}\vec{F}\cdot d\vec{r}=f(x_{1},y_{1})-f(x_{2},y_{2})$$
$$f(x_{1},y_{1})=\left(\int_{c}\vec{F}\cdot d\vec{r}\right)+f(x_{2},y_{2})$$
Since we are working with a gradient field, our resulting function is path independent, meaning that we can choose a path that is computationally beneficial to us. We can thus choose the path which has a path parallel to the $x$ axis and one which is parallel to the $y$ axis.

We will denote the path component parallel to the $x$ axis by $c_{1}$, and the path component parallel to the $y$ axis by $c_{2}$. We can thus generate our $\vec{r}$ function for both of the paths.

For the component that is parallel to the $x$ axis, $c_{1}$, we get that $\vec{r}$ varies between a starting point on the $x$ axis, and an ending point on it, but the $y$ component is completely ignored. We get that $dx=1$ and $dy=0$. Likewise, for the $y$ part we have that $dx=0$ and $dy=1$. 

Suppose that we are integrating from the points $(0,0)$ to $(x_{1},y_{1})$ for the vector field $\vec{F}=(4x^2+axy)\hat{i}+(3y^2+4x^2)\hat{j}$. We can write our line integral here as:
$$\int_{c}\vec{F}\cdot d\vec{r}=\int_{c}Mdx+Ndy$$
We will use the above trick to separate this integral its components parallel to the $x$ axis $y$ axis respectively:
$$\int_{c}Mdx+Ndy=\int_{0}^{x_{1}}4x^2\cdot dx+\int_{0}^{y_{1}}(3y^2+4x_{1}^2)\cdot dy$$
The component of the gradient described with respect to $x$ and $y$ when $x$ is set to zero is removed and the same for when $y$ is set to zero. Notice that the $8xy$ term isn't present in the first integral and the $x$ term in the second integral becomes $4x_{1}^2$ since we are holding it constant. 

When we compute our integrand we get:
$$f(x_{1},y_{1})=\dfrac{4}{3}x_{1}^3+[y_{1}^3+4x_{1}^2y_{1}]+c$$
We can drop our constants and obtain our result simply by:
$$f(x,y)=\dfrac{4}{3}x^3+[y^3+4x^2y]+c$$

#### Method 2 Antiderivatives 
We want to solve the function $f$ that gives us $f_{x}=4x^2+8xy$ and $f_{y}=3y^2+4x^2$. We can integrate our $f_{x}$ with respect to $x$: 
$$\int f_{x}dx=\int (4x^2+8xy)dx=\dfrac{4x^3}{3}+4x^2y+g(y)$$
Our "constant" here is a function dependent on $y$ that when doing a partial derivative, is eliminated. We can compute $f_{y}$ from our antiderivative of $f_{x}$:
$$\dfrac{\partial }{\partial y}\left(\dfrac{4x^3}{3}+4x^2y+g(y)\right)=\left(4x^2+g'(y)\right)$$
We then need to match this expression with $f_{y}$ and determine $g'(y)$:
$$4x^2+g'(y)=3y^2+4x^2$$
$$g'(y)=3y^2$$
$$g(y)=y^3+c$$
In conclusion, we obtain our result by plugging this formula back into the main formula:
$$f=\dfrac{4x^3}{3}+4x^2y+y^3+c$$
As an aside, we shouldn't apply this same procedure to both $f_{x}$ and $f_{y}$ at once and try and match things as tempting as it is. If we get an $x$ termed function when finding $g(y)$, we have a good indication that we ended up doing something wrong in the process. 

---
# Equivalent Conditions for Gradient Field 
1. $\oint_{c} \vec{F}\cdot d\vec{r}=0$ for all closed curved integrals
2. $\vec{F}$ is conservative 
3. If $\vec{F}$ is "[[Simply Connected]]", $N_{x}=M_{y} \Longleftrightarrow$ $\vec{F}$ is a Gradient field 
4. The [[Curl]] of $\vec{F}$ is 0 