---
title: Hilbert Space
tags:
  - Functional_Analysis
draft: "False"
---
# Hilbert Space 
Let $(\mathcal{H},\langle , \rangle )$ be an [[Inner Product]]  space over $\mathbb{F}$. We say that a [[Hilbert Space]] is "complete" with respect to the [[norm]] of a vector, $\vec{v}$ using the [[Euclidean Norm]]. 

Intuitively, we can think of [[Hilbert Space]]s as a generalization of [[Vector Space]]s to infinite dimension, this involves the idea of "completeness". 

We can think of a complete space as one without a hole. For example $\mathbb{Q}$, we know that $\mathbb{Q}$ is not complete since it has many holes. For instance $\sqrt{ 2 } \not \in \mathbb{Q}$. 

For some given [[Linearly Independent]] sequence in $\mathcal{H}$, $\{\vec{w_{n}}\}$, we can use  [[The Gram-Schmidt Process]] to force the [[Hilbert Space]] to have an orthonormal basis. 

In Fourier Analysis we are able to get a countably infinite basis for our [[Hilbert Space]] to span a space of functions. Theses spaces are of an uncountable size and so having a countably infinite basis here is very convenient. 

### Thm.) [[Pythagorean Theorem]] holds for [[Hilbert Space]]s (of finite dimension, $n$) 
The [[Pythagorean Theorem]] holds for [[Hilbert Space]]s as well. We can state it in the following using the [[Orthogonal]] set:
$$\large \{ \vec{v_{1}},\vec{v_{2}}, \dots , \vec{v_{n}} \} : \vec{v_{i}}^{H} \vec{v_{j}} = 0 \text{ in } \mathcal{H} $$
then we have that:
$$\large \left\|\sum_{i=1}^{n}\vec{v_{n}} \right\|^{2}= \sum_{i=1}^{n}\| \vec{v_{i}} \|^2$$

### Proof.)
$$\begin{align}\large \left\| \sum_{i=1}^N \vec{v_{i}}  \right\|^2 = \left\langle \sum_{i=1}^N \vec{v_{i}}, \sum_{j=1}^N \vec{v_{j}}  \right\rangle = \sum_{n,m=1}^N \left\langle \vec{v_{i}}, \vec{v_{j}}  \right\rangle = \sum_{n,m=1}^n \delta_{ij} \cdot \langle \vec{v_{i}},\vec{v_{j}} \rangle \\ \large \sum_{i=1}^N \langle \vec{v_{i}},\vec{v_{i}} \rangle = \sum_{i=1}^N \|\vec{v_{n}}\|^2
 \\
 \end{align}$$
Note since we assume that our set is orthogonal we make use of the [[Kronecker Delta]] here. 

### Thm.) Best Approximation Theorem for [[Hilbert Space]]s 
Let $(\mathcal{H},\langle , \rangle )$ be a [[Hilbert Space]]. 

Let $W$ be a vector subspace generated by the orthogonal set, $\{\vec{v_{1}},\vec{v_{2}}, \dots, \vec{v_{n}}   \}$ of nonzero vectors. Let $\vec{x} \in \mathcal{H}$, then:
$$ \large \text{Proj}_{w}\vec{x} \text{ } =  \sum_{k=1}^{n} \frac{\langle \vec{x},\vec{v_{k}} \rangle}{\langle \vec{v_{k}},\vec{v_{k}} \rangle} \vec{v_{k}}$$ is an [[Orthogonal Projector]] of $\vec{x}$ onto $\mathcal{H}$ onto $W$. We also know that this solution is unique, in the following sense:
$$\large \left\|  \vec{x} - \sum_{k=1}^n \frac{\langle x , v_{k} \rangle}{\langle v_{k},v_{k} \rangle} \vec{v_{k}} \right\|^2 \leq \left\|  \vec{x} - \sum_{k=1}^n c_{k}  \cdot\vec{v_{k}} \right\|^2 : c_{k} \in \mathbb{R}$$
Which is to say that this approximation is the best possible approximation (minimizes the distance between the actual solution $\vec{x}$ and our approximation the most) such that any other approximation is further away. 

Note that this formula here is essentially the same as [[The Gram-Schmidt Process]].

### Thm.) [[Bessel's Inequality]]
Let Let $(\mathcal{H},\langle , \rangle )$ be a [[Hilbert Space]]. Given the [[Orthonormal]] set in $\mathcal{H}$, $\{ \vec{u_{1}} ,\vec{u_{2}}, \dots, \vec{u_{n}}  \}$, then for any $\vec{x} \in \mathcal{H}$:
$$\large \sum_{n} |\langle \vec{x}, \vec{u_{i}} \rangle|^{2} \leq \|x\|^2$$
### Thm.)
In the case that  the set of $\{ u_{i}\}$ is an orthonormal set that [[span]]s the space $\mathcal{H}$, it follows that for any $\vec{x} \in \mathcal{H}$ we have that:
$$ \large \vec{x} = \sum_{n} \langle \vec{ x}, \vec{ u_{n}} \rangle \vec{ u_{n}}$$
Which means that we can decompose any vector in a [[Hilbert Space]] with respect to each orthonormal vector. 
### Thm.) [[Parseval's Theorem]]:
This is a stronger version of [[Bessel's Inequality]] when we are given that set of $\{ u_{i}\}$ is an orthonormal set that [[span]]s the space $\mathcal{H}$:
$$\large \|x\|^{2}= \sum_{n} |\langle x, u_{n} \rangle|^2 $$
This is a generalization of the [[Pythagorean Theorem]]. 